:orphan:

.. default-role:: term
.. title:: Library Evolution Support in Swift ("Resilience")

:Author: Jordan Rose
:Author: John McCall

One of Swift's primary design goals is to allow efficient execution of code
without sacrificing load-time abstraction of implementation.

Abstraction of implementation means that code correctly written against a
published interface will correctly function when the underlying implementation
changes to anything which still satisfies the original interface. There are
many potential reasons to provide this sort of abstraction. Apple's primary
interest is in making it easy and painless for our internal and external
developers to improve the ecosystem of Apple products by creating good and
secure programs and libraries; subtle deployment problems and/or unnecessary
dependencies on the behavior of our implementations would work against these
goals.

Our current design in Swift is to provide opt-out load-time abstraction of
implementation for all language features. Alone, this would either incur
unacceptable cost or force widespread opting-out of abstraction. We intend to
mitigate this primarily by designing the language and its implementation to
minimize unnecessary and unintended abstraction:

* Within the domain that defines an entity, all the details of its
  implementation are available.

* When entities are not exposed outside their defining module, their
  implementation is not constrained.

* By default, entities are not exposed outside their defining modules. This is
  independently desirable to reduce accidental API surface area, but happens to
  also interact well with the performance design.

* Avoiding unnecessary language guarantees and taking advantage of that
  flexibility to limit load-time costs.

We also intend to provide tools to detect inadvertent changes in interfaces.

.. contents:: :local:

.. warning:: **This document is still in draft stages.** Large additions and
  restructuring are still planned, including:
  
  * A summary for each declaration kind what changes are binary-compatible.
  * A proper definition for "versioned entity".
  * Several possible versioned attribute syntaxes, instead of just this one.
  * A discussion of back-dating, and how it usually is not allowed.
  * A brief discussion of the implementation issues for fixed-layout value types with resilient members, and with non-public members.
  * A revisal of the discussion on fixed-layout classes.
  * A brief discussion of "deployment files", which represent distribution groupings that are themselves versioned. (For example, OS X 10.10.3 contains Foundation version 1153.20.) Deployment files are likely to provide a concrete implementation of "resilience domains".
  * A way to specify "minimum deployment libraries", like today's minimum deployment targets.

Introduction
============

This model is intended to serve library designers whose libraries will evolve
over time. Such libraries must be both `backwards-compatible`, meaning that
existing clients should continue to work even when the library is updated, and
`forwards-compatible`, meaning that future clients will be able run using the
current version of the library. In simple terms:

- Last year's apps should work with this year's library.
- Next year's apps should work with this year's library.

This document will frequently refer to a *library* which vends public APIs, and
a single *client* that uses them. The same principles apply even when multiple
libraries and multiple clients are involved.

This model is not of interest to libraries that are bundled with their clients
(distribution via source, static library, or embedded/sandboxed dynamic
library). Because a client always uses a particular version of such a library,
there is no need to worry about backwards- or forwards-compatibility. Just as
developers with a single app target are not forced to think about access
control, anyone writing a bundled library should not be required to use any of
the annotations described below in order to achieve full performance.

The term "resilience" comes from the occasional use of "fragile" to describe
certain constructs that have very strict binary compatibility rules. For
example, a client's use of a C struct is "fragile" in that if the library
changes the fields in the struct, the client's use will "break". In Swift,
changing the fields in a struct will not automatically cause problems for
existing clients, so we say the struct is "resilient".


Using Versioned API
===================

References to a versioned API must always be guarded with the appropriate
availability checks. This means that any client entities that rely on having
certain APIs from a library must themselves be restricted to contexts in which
those APIs are available. This is accomplished using ``@available`` as well,
by specifying the name of the client library along with the required version::

    // Client code
    @available(Magician 1.5)
    class CrystalBallView : MagicView { â€¦ }

Library versions can also be checked dynamically using ``#available``, allowing
for fallback behavior when the requested library version is not present::

    func scareMySiblings() {
      if #available(Magician 1.2) {
        conjureDemons()
      } else {
        print("BOO!!")
      }
    }

.. note::

    Possible implementations include generating a hidden symbol into a library,
    or putting the version number in some kind of metadata, like the Info.plist
    in a framework bundle on Darwin platforms.

This is essentially the same model as the availability checking released in
Swift 2.0, but generalized for checking library versions instead of just OS
versions.


Publishing Versioned API
========================

A library's API is already marked with the ``public`` attribute. Versioning
information can be added to any ``public`` entity with the ``@available``
attribute, this time specifying *only* a version number. This declares when the
entity was first exposed publicly in the current module.

::

    @available(1.2)
    public func conjureDemons()

.. admonition:: TODO

    Should this go on ``public`` instead? How does this play with SPI
    <rdar://problem/18844229>?

Using the same attribute for both publishing and using versioned APIs helps tie
the feature together and enforces a consistent set of rules. The one difference
is that code within a library may always use all other entities declared within
the library (barring their own availability checks), since the entire library
is shipped as a unit. That is, even if a particular API was introduced in v1.0,
its (non-public) implementation may refer to APIs introduced in later versions.

Swift libraries are strongly encouraged to use `semantic versioning`_, but this
is not enforced by the language.

Some ``internal`` entities may also use ``@available``. See `Pinning`_ below.

.. _semantic versioning: http://semver.org


Giving Up Flexibility
=====================

Fixed-layout Structs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, a library owner may add members to a public struct between releases
without breaking binary compatibility. This requires a certain amount of care
and indirection when dealing with values of struct type to account for the
struct's size and non-`trivial` fields not being known in advance, which of
course has performance implications.

To opt out of this flexibility, a struct may be marked ``@fixed_layout``. This
promises that no stored properties will be added to or removed from the struct,
even ``private`` or ``internal`` ones. Methods and computed properties may
still be added to the struct.

The ``@fixed_layout`` attribute takes a version number, just like
``@available``. This is so that clients can deploy against older versions of
the library, which may have a different layout for the struct. (In this case
the client must manipulate the struct as if the ``@fixed_layout`` attribute
were absent.)

.. admonition:: TODO

    There's a benefit to knowing that a struct was ``@fixed_layout`` since it
    was first made available. How should that be spelled?


Fixed-layout Classes?
---------------------

There is some benefit to knowing that a class has a fixed layout---that is,
that the stored properties of the class and all its superclasses are guaranteed
not to change in future versions of a library. This would, for example, allow
the class's memory to be allocated on the stack, as long as it can be proven
that no references to the class escape. However, such a constraint is unlikely
to be provable in practice from outside the class's own module, where its
primary operations are opaquely defined. Thus, until a tangible benefit has
been demonstrated, the ``@fixed_layout`` attribute will not apply to classes.

(Another benefit would be to simplify the calculations needed for the offsets
of stored properties within classes. However, it's unclear that this would have
any significant benefit, particularly when most public properties are
manipulated through their accessors.)


Closed Enums
~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, a library owner may add new cases to a public enum between releases
without breaking binary compatibility. As with structs, this results in a fair
amount of indirection when dealing with enum values, in order to potentially
accommodate new values.

.. note::

    If an enum value has a known case, or can be proven to belong to a set of
    known cases, the compiler is of course free to use a more efficient
    representation for the value, just as it may discard fields of structs that
    are provably never accessed.

A library owner may opt out of this flexibility by marking the enum as
``@closed``. A "closed" enum may not have any ``private`` or ``internal`` cases
and may not add new cases in the future. This guarantees to clients that the
enum cases are exhaustive.

.. note::

    Were a "closed" enum allowed to have non-public cases, clients of the
    library would still have to treat the enum as opaque and would still have
    to be able to handle unknown cases in their ``switch`` statements.

The ``@closed`` attribute takes a version number, just like ``@available``.
This is so that clients can deploy against older versions of the library, which
may have non-public cases in the enum. (In this case the client must manipulate
the enum as if the ``@closed`` attribute were absent.)

Even for default "open" enums, adding new cases should not be done lightly. Any
clients attempting to do an exhaustive switch over all enum cases will likely
not handle new cases well.

.. note::

    One possibility would be a way to map new cases to older ones on older
    clients. This would only be useful for certain kinds of enums, though, and
    adds a lot of additional complexity, all of which would be tied up in
    versions. Our generalized switch patterns probably make it hard to nail
    down the behavior here.


Inlineable Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Functions are a very common example of resilience: the function's declaration
is published as API, but its body may change between library versions as long
as it upholds the same semantic contracts. This applies to other function-like
constructs as well: initializers, accessors, and deinitializers.

However, sometimes it is useful to provide the body to clients as well. There
are a few common reasons for this:

- The function only performs simple operations, and so inlining it will both
  save the overhead of a cross-library function call and allow further
  optimization of callers.

- The function accesses a fixed-layout struct with non-public members; this
  allows the library author to preserve invariants while still allowing
  efficient access to the struct.

A public function marked with the ``@inlineable`` attribute makes its body
available to clients as part of the module's public interface. The
``@inlineable`` attribute takes a version number, just like ``@available``;
clients may not assume that the body of the function is suitable when deploying
against older versions of the library.

Clients are not required to inline a function marked ``@inlineable``.

.. note::

    It is legal to change the implementation of an inlineable function in the
    next release of the library. However, any such change must be made with the
    understanding that it may or may not affect existing clients.

Restrictions
------------

Because the body of an inlineable function (or method, accessor, initializer,
or deinitializer) may be inlined into another module, it must not make any
assumptions that rely on knowledge of the current module. Here is a trivial
example::

    public struct Point2D {
      var x, y: Double
      public init(x: Double, y: Double) { â€¦ }
    }
    
    extension Point2D {
      @inlineable public func distanceTo(other: Point2D) -> Double {
        let deltaX = self.x - other.x
        let deltaY = self.y - other.y
        return sqrt(deltaX*deltaX + deltaY*deltaY)
      }
    }

As written, this ``distanceTo`` method is not safe to inline. The next release
of the library could very well replace the implementation of ``Point2D`` with a
polar representation::

    public struct Point2D {
      var r, theta: Double
      public init(x: Double, y: Double) { â€¦ }
    }

and the ``x`` and ``y`` properties have now disappeared. To avoid this, we have
the following restrictions on the bodies of inlineable functions:

- **They may not define any local types** (other than typealiases).

- **They must not reference any** ``private`` **entities,** except for local
  functions declared within the inlineable function itself.

- **They must not reference any** ``internal`` **entities except for those that
  have been** `availability-pinned`_. See below for a discussion of pinning.

- **They must not reference any entities less available than the function
  itself.**

.. _availability-pinned: #pinning

An inlineable function is still emitted into its own module's binary. This
makes it possible to take an existing function and make it inlineable, as long
as the current body makes sense when deploying against an earlier version of
the library.

If the body of an inlineable function is used in any way by a client module
(say, to determine that it does not read any global variables), that module
must take care to emit and use its own copy of the function. This is because
analysis of the function body may not apply to the version of the function
currently in the library.

Local Functions
---------------

If an inlineable function contains local functions or closures, these are
implicitly made inlineable as well. This is important in case you decide to
change the inlineable function later. If the inlineable function is emitted
into a client module as described above, the local functions must be as well.
(At the SIL level, these local functions are considered to have ``shared``
linkage.)

Pinning
-------

An `availability-pinned` entity is simply an ``internal`` member, free
function, or global binding that has been marked ``@available``. This promises
that the entity will be available at link time in the containing module's
binary. This makes it safe to refer to such an entity from an inlineable
function. If a pinned entity is ever made ``public``, its availability should
not be changed.

.. note::

    Why isn't this a special form of ``public``? Because we don't want it to
    imply everything that ``public`` does, such as requiring overrides to be
    ``public``.

Because a pinned class member may eventually be made public, it must be assumed
that new overrides may eventually appear from outside the module unless the
member is marked ``final`` or the class is not publicly subclassable.

We could do away with the entire "pinning" feature if we restricted inlineable
functions to only refer to public entities. However, this removes one of the
primary reasons to make something inlineable: to allow efficient access to a
type while still protecting its invariants.

.. note::

    Types are not allowed to be pinned because that would have many more ripple
    effects. It's not technically impossible; it just requires a lot more
    thought.


A Unifying Theme
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

So far this proposal has talked about three separate ways to lock down on three
separate Swift entities: structs, enums, and functions. Each of these has a
different set of constraints it enforces on the library author and promises it
makes to clients. However, they all follow a common theme of giving up the
flexibility of future changes in exchange for improved performance and perhaps
some semantic guarantees. As such, we could consider using a common attribute,
say ``@fixed``, ``@inline``, or ``@fragile``; either way, all attributes in
this section can be referred to as "fragility attributes".


Constants
~~~~~~~~~

The ``let`` keyword creates a named constant whose value will not change for
the lifetime of that entity; for a global or static constant, this lasts from
when the constant is first accessed (and lazily initialized) until the end of
program execution. However, different versions of the same library may choose
to have different values for a constant---say, a string describing the
library's copyright information.

In order to make use of a constant's value across library boundaries, the
library owner may mark the constant as ``@inlineable``. As when applied to
functions, the attribute takes a version number specifying which versions of
the library will behave correctly if the value is inlined into client code.

Note that if the constant's initial value expression has any observable side
effects, including the allocation of class instances, it must not be treated
as inlineable. A constant must always behave as if it is initialized exactly
once.

.. admonition:: TODO

    Is this a condition we can detect at compile-time? Do we have to be
    restricted to things that can be lowered to compile-time constants?


Properties
~~~~~~~~~~

By default, a stored property in a struct or class may be replaced by a
computed property in later versions of a library. As shown above, the
``@fixed_layout`` attribute promises that all stored properties currently in a
type will remain stored in all future library versions, but sometimes that
isn't a reasonable promise. In this case, a library owner may still want to
allow clients to rely on a *specific* stored property remaining stored, by
applying the ``@fixed`` attribute to the property.

.. admonition:: TODO

    Is it valid for a fixed property to have observing accessors, or is it more
    useful to promise that the setter is just a direct field access too? If it
    were spelled ``@fragile``, I would assume that accessors are permitted but
    they become inlineable, and so not having any accessors is just a
    degenerate case of that.
    
    Is this feature sufficiently useful to be proposed initially at all, or is
    it too granular?

Like all other attributes in this section, the ``@fixed`` attribute must
specify in which version of the library clients may rely on the property being
stored. The attribute may not be applied to non-final properties in classes.

.. note::

    It would be possible to allow ``@fixed`` on non-final properties, and have
    it only apply when the client code is definitively working with an instance
    of the base class, not any of its subclasses. But this is probably too
    subtle, and makes it look like the attribute is doing something useful when
    it actually isn't.



Other Promises About Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Advanced users may want to promise more specific things about various types.
These are similar to the internal ``effects`` attribute we have for functions,
except that they can be enforced by the compiler.

- ``trivial``: Promises that the type is `trivial`. Note that this is not a
  recursive property; a trivial type may still require indirection due to
  having an unknown size, and so a type containing that type is not considered
  trivial.

- ``size_in_bits(N)``: Promises that the type is not larger than a certain 
  size. (It may be smaller.)

- ``no_payload``: Promises that an enum does not have payloads on any of its
  cases (even the non-public ones).

Collectively these features are known as "performance assertions", to
underscore the fact that they do not affect how a type is used at the source
level, but do allow for additional optimizations. We may also expose some of
these qualities to static or dynamic queries for performance-sensitive code.

All of these features take a version number, just like the more semantic
fragility attributes above. The exact spelling is not proposed by this document.


Optimization
============

Allowing a library to evolve inhibits the optimization of client code in
several ways. For example:

- A function that currently does not access global memory might do so in the
  future, so calls to it cannot be freely reordered in client code.

- A stored property may be replaced by a computed property in the future, so
  client code must not try to access the storage directly.

- A struct may have additional members in the future, so client code must not
  assume it fits in any fixed-sized allocation.

In order to make sure client code doesn't make unsafe assumptions, queries
about properties that may change between library versions must be parameterized
with the `availability context` that is using the entity. An availability
context is a set of minimum platform and library versions that can be assumed
present for code executing within the context. This allows the compiler to
answer the question, "Given what I know about where this code will be executed,
what can I assume about a particular entity being used?".

If the entity is declared within the same module as the code that's using it,
then the code is permitted to know all the details of how the entity is
declared. After all, if the entity is changed, the code that's using it will be
recompiled.

However, if the entity is declared in another module, then the code using it
must be more conservative, and will therefore receive more conservative answers
to its queries. For example, a stored property may report itself as computed.

The presence of versioned fragility attributes makes the situation more
complicated. Within a client function that requires version 1.5 of a particular
library, the compiler should be able to take advantage of any fragility
information (and performance assertions) introduced prior to version 1.5.


Inlineable Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, the availability context for a library always includes the latest
version of the library itself, since that code is always distributed as a unit.
However, this is not true for functions that have been marked inlineable (see
`Inlineable Functions`_ above). Inlineable code must be treated as if it is
outside the current module, since once it's inlined it will be.

For inlineable code, the availability context is exactly the same as the
equivalent non-inlineable code except that the assumed version of the
containing library is the version attached to the ``@inlineable`` attribute.
Code within this context must be treated as if the containing library were just
a normal dependency.

A publicly inlineable function still has a public symbol, which may be used
when the function is referenced from a client rather than called. This version
of the function is not subject to the same restrictions as the version that
may be inlined, and so it may be desirable to compile a function twice: once
for inlining, once for maximum performance.


Local Availability Contexts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Swift availability contexts aren't just at the declaration level; they also
cover specific regions of code inside function bodies as well. These "local"
constructs are formed using the ``#available`` construct, which performs a
dynamic check.

In theory, it would be legal to allow code dominated by a ``#available`` check
to take advantage of additional fragility information introduced by the more
restrictive dependencies that were checked for. However, this is an additional
optimization that may be complicated to implement (and even to represent
properly in SIL), and so it is not a first priority.


Resilience Domains
==================

As described in the `Introduction`_, the features and considerations discussed
in this document do not apply to libraries distributed in a bundle with their
clients. In this case, a client can rely on all the current implementation
details of its libraries when compiling, since the same version of the library
is guaranteed to be present at runtime. This allows more optimization than
would otherwise be possible.

In some cases, a collection of libraries may be built and delivered together,
even though their clients may be packaged separately. (For example, the ICU
project is usually built into several library binaries, but these libraries are
always distributed together.) While the *clients* cannot rely on a particular
version of any library being present, the various libraries in the collection
should be able to take advantage of the implementations of their dependencies
also in the collection---that is, it should treat all entities as if marked
with the appropriate fragility attributes. Modules in this sort of collection
are said to be in the same *resilience domain.*

Exactly how resilience domains are specified is not covered by this proposal,
and indeed they are an additive feature. One possibility is that a library's
resilience domain defaults to the name of the module, but can be overridden. If
a client has the same resilience domain name as a library it is using, it may
assume that version of the library will be present at runtime.


Protocol Conformances
=====================

Consider this scenario: a library is released containing both a ``MagicType`` 
protocol and a ``Wand`` struct. ``Wand`` satisfies all the requirements of the
``MagicType`` protocol, but the conformance was never actually declared in the
library. Someone files a bug, and it gets fixed in version 1.1.

Now, what happens when this client code is deployed against version 1.0 of the
library?

::

    // Library
    @available(1.0)
    public func classifyMagicItem<Item: MagicType>(item: Item) -> MagicKind
    
    // Client
    let kind = classifyMagicItem(elderWand)
    log("\(elderWand): \(kind)")

In order to call ``classifyMagicItem``, the client code needs access to the
conformance of ``Wand`` to the ``MagicType`` protocol. But that conformance
*didn't exist* in version 1.0, so the client program will fail on older systems.

Therefore, a library author needs a way to declare that a type *now* conforms
to a protocol when it previously didn't. The way to do this is by placing
availability information on an extension::

    @available(1.1)
    extension Wand : MagicType {}

Note that this is unnecessary if either ``Wand`` or ``MagicType`` were itself
introduced in version 1.1; in that case, it would not be possible to access
the conformance from a context that only required 1.0.

As with access control, applying ``@available`` to an extension overrides the
default availability of entities declared within the extension; unlike access
control, entities within the extension may freely declare themselves to be
either more or less available than what the extension provides.

.. note::

    This may feel like a regression from Objective-C, where `duck typing` would
    allow a ``Wand`` to be passed as an ``id <MagicType>`` without ill effects.
    However, ``Wand`` would still fail a ``-conformsToProtocol:`` check in
    version 1.0 of the library, and so whether or not the client code will work
    is dependent on what should be implementation details of the library.


Checking Binary Compatibility
=============================

With this many manual controls, it's important that library owners be able to
check their work. Therefore, we intend to ship a tool that can compare two
versions of a library's public interface, and present any suspect differences
for verification. Important cases include but are not limited to:

- Removal of public entities.

- Incompatible modifications to public entities, such as added protocol 
  conformances lacking versioning information.
  
- Unsafely-backdated "fragile" attributes as discussed in the `Giving Up
  Flexibility`_ section.
  
- Unsafe modifications to entities marked with the "fragile" attributes, such as 
  adding a stored property to a ``@fixed_layout`` struct.


Automatic Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A possible extension of this "checker" would be a tool that *automatically*
generates versioning information for entities in a library, given the previous
public interface of the library. This would remove the need for versions on any
of the fragility attributes, and declaring versioned API would be as simple as
marking an entity ``public``. Obviously this would also remove the possibility
of human error in managing library versions.

However, making this tool has a number of additional difficulties beyond the
simple checker tool:

- The tool must be able to read past library interface formats. This is true
  for a validation tool as well, but the cost of failure is much higher.
  Similarly, the past version of a library *must* be available to correctly
  compile a new version.

- Because the information goes into a library's public interface, the
  versioning tool must either be part of the compilation process, modify the
  interface generated by compilation, or produce a sidecar file that can be
  loaded when compiling the client. In any case, it must *produce* information
  in addition to *consuming* it.

- Occasionally a library owner may want to override the inferred versions. This
  can be accomplished by providing explicit versioning information, as in the
  proposal.

- Bugs in the tool manifest as bugs in client programs.

Because this tool would require a fair amount of additional work, it is not
part of this initial model. It is something we may decide to add in the future.


Summary
=======

When possible, Swift gives library developers freedom to evolve their code
without breaking binary compatibility. This has implications for both the
semantics and performance of client code, and so library owners also have tools
to waive the ability to make certain future changes. The language guarantees
that client code will never accidentally introduce implicit dependencies on
specific versions of libraries.


Glossary
========

.. glossary::

  ABI
    The runtime contract for using a particular API (or for an entire library),
    including things like symbol names, calling conventions, and type layout
    information. Stands for "Application Binary Interface".

  API
    An `entity` in a library that a `client` may use, or the collection of all
    such entities in a library. (If contrasting with `SPI`, only those entities
    that are available to arbitrary clients.) Marked ``public`` in 
    Swift. Stands for "Application Programming Interface".

  availability context
    The collection of library and platform versions that can be assumed, at
    minimum, to be present in a certain block of code. Availability contexts
    are always properly nested, and the global availability context includes
    the module's minimum deployment target and minimum dependency versions.

  availability-pinned
    See `Pinning`_.
    
  backwards-compatible
    A modification to an API that does not break existing clients. May also
    describe the API in question.

  binary compatibility
    A general term encompassing both backwards- and forwards-compatibility 
    concerns. Also known as "ABI compatibility".

  client
    A target that depends on a particular library. It's usually easiest to
    think of this as an application, but it could be another library.
    (In certain cases, the "library" is itself an application, such as when
    using Xcode's unit testing support.)

  duck typing
    In Objective-C, the ability to treat a class instance as having an
    unrelated type, as long as the instance handles all messages sent to it.
    (Note that this is a dynamic constraint.)

  entity
    A type, function, member, or global in a Swift program.

  forwards-compatible
    An API that is designed to handle future clients, perhaps allowing certain
    changes to be made without changing the ABI.

  fragility attribute
    See `A Unifying Theme`_.

  module
    The primary unit of code sharing in Swift. Code in a module is always built
    together, though it may be spread across several source files.
  
  performance assertion
    See `Other Promises About Types`_.

  resilience domain
    A grouping for code that will always be recompiled and distributed
    together, and can thus take advantage of details about a type
    even if it changes in the future.

  SPI
    A subset of `API` that is only available to certain clients. Stands for
    "System Programming Interface".

  target
    In this document, a collection of code in a single Swift module that is
    built together; a "compilation unit". Roughly equivalent to a target in 
    Xcode.

  trivial
    A value whose assignment just requires a fixed-size bit-for-bit copy
    without any indirection or reference-counting operations.
