MH Mailbox Format
=================

The MH mailbox format originated with a system developed by the RAND
corporation and the University of California.  Each email message is stored in
a single file, with directories indicating folders and subfolders.  The index
or order of the messages in the folder determine what each message is named
(which may not correspond to the inode index).  The "safe" way to guarantee a
message gets written to a mail folder is to first write the message out to a
randomly chosen temporary file name, then link or rename the file to the number
LAST+1, where LAST is the last sequential message in the folder.  If the rename
fails, increment the counter and try again.

MH folders also maintains a meta-file called '~/Mail/.mh_context' that contains
information about the most current folder and message chosen.  Each sub-folder
also contains a meta-file called '.mh_sequences' or '.xmhcache', which
maintains keyword association lists for stored queries.  New messages are
stored in the "unseen" sequence for a folder.  Procmail itself does not bother
making changes to this file, rather simply delivers the message to the folder
and leaves determining new messages as an exercise for the MUA.  For example:

---%<-------------------------------------------------------------------------
unseen: 1-3 8 15
projectB: 2-8 10
---%<-------------------------------------------------------------------------

shows two stored sequences of messages.  Command-line utilities can then use
these sequences as shortcuts.'show unseen', for example, is short-hand for
'show 1-3 8 15'.

Deleted emails are indicated by prepending a "," to the name.  One of the
largest problems that IMAP servers have with MH format is the volatility of the
email message name itself.  The command-line utility 'sortm' is used to sort
mail folders by date or string matching.  To do this, messages are actually
renamed to reflect the new sort order.  IMAP servers are required to maintain
an index of the folder contents, so when the names of the file entries cannot
be guaranteed to be stable, IMAP servers have to throw out previous index
caches and re-index.

When operating with a shell account on a machine that also provides IMAP access
to folders, users are encouraged not to re-sort email locally while accessing
the IMAP server remotely.

Links

 * NMH [http://www.nongnu.org/nmh/]: New MH Client
 * Original RAND MH [http://rand-mh.sourceforge.net] Code
 * MH-Book [http://rand-mh.sourceforge.net/book/]
 * Mutt Manual [http://www.mutt.org/doc/manual/manual-4.html#ss4.6]: Describing
   how it handles MH folders

(This file was created from the wiki on 2013-08-05 04:42)
