                        README for XFree86[tm] 4.3.0

                          The XFree86 Project, Inc

                              26 February 2003

                                  Abstract

     XFree86 is an Open Source version of the X Window System that sup-
     ports many UNIX(R) and UNIX-like operating systems (such as Linux,
     FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD and Solaris x86) on Intel and other plat-
     forms.  This version is compatible with X11R6.6.

1.  What is XFree86 4.3.0?

XFree86 4.3.0 is the sixth full release in the XFree86 4.x series.

XFree86 4.x is the current XFree86 release series.  The first release in this
series was in early 2000.  The core of XFree86 4.x is a modular X server.
The 4.3.0 version is a new release that includes additional hardware support,
functional enhancements and bug fixes.  Specific release enhancements can be
viewed in the Release Notes.

Most modern PC video hardware is supported in XFree86 4.3.0, and most PC
video hardware that isn't supported explicitly can be used with the "vesa"
driver.  The Driver Status document has a summary of what hardware is sup-
ported in 4.3.0 compared with the old 3.3.x (3.3.6) series.  It is a good
idea to check there before upgrading if you are currently running 3.3.6 with
older hardware.

XFree86 is produced by The XFree86 Project, Inc, which is a group of mostly
volunteer independent developers.  XFree86 is a non-commercial organisation,
and would not be viable without the invaluable development contributions of
volunteers.  This release is dedicated to all who have supported and con-
tributed to XFree86 over the last eleven years.

2.  Pointers to additional information

The documentation for this release can be found online at the XFree86 web
site <URL:http://www.xfree86.org/4.3.0/>.  Documentation for the latest
release version can always be found here <URL:http://www.xfree86.org/cur-
rent/>, and documentation for the latest pre-release snapshot can be found
here <URL:http://www.xfree86.org/snapshot/>.  Checking those last two links
is a good way of finding out the latest versions available from XFree86.

Information about binary distributions and the attendant installation
instructions can be found in the Installation Document.

Copyright and Licensing information for this release and all XFree86 releases
can be found in the License Document.

The XFree86 version numbering system (including historical information) can
be found in the Versions Document.

Additional information may be available at the XFree86 web site
<URL:http://www.xfree86.org/>, and pointers to other information are avail-
able at the XFree86 support page <URL:http://www.xfree86.org/support.html>.

3.  The Public Mailing Lists

3.1  CVS Commit

For those who want to see what has been committed recently to our CVS reposi-
tory this is the list that will show you those updates.  This list is updated
dynamically every time the repository is updated after the the commit hap-
pens.

3.2  Devel

This list is available for discussions about XFree86 development and for fol-
lowing up well-defined bug reports.  Many experienced XFree86 developers are
present on this list.

3.3  XFree86

This list is available for any discussions and questions related to XFree86.
Support related questions should be sent here.  Many experienced XFree86
developers monitor this list.

4.  Contributing to XFree86

If you have any new work or enhancements/bug fixes for existing work, please
submit them to <fixes@XFree86.org>.  This will ensure that they are included
in future releases.  For new work, it's usually a good idea to discuss it
first on the <devel@XFree86.org> list.

5.  How to get XFree86 4.3.0

XFree86 4.3.0 can be found at the XFree86 ftp server
<URL:ftp://ftp.xfree86.org/pub/XFree86/4.3.0/>, and at mirrors of this
server.  Information about obtaining and installing binary distributions of
this release can be found in the Installation Document.  Information about
obtaining the release in source form is given below.

The source for version 4.3.0 is split into seven tarballs: X430src-1.tgz,
X430src-2.tgz, X430src-3.tgz, X430src-4.tgz, X430src-5.tgz, X430src-6.tgz and
X430src-7.tgz.  The first three contain everything except the fonts and gen-
eral X11 documentation.  Those three are sufficient for building XFree86 if
you already have a set of fonts.  The fourth and fifth contain the fonts.
The sixth contains the source for the general X11 documentation.  The seventh
contains the general X11 documentation in hardcopy format.

A source patch relative to version 4.2.0 is also available.  Because of its
size, it is split into four parts.  The patch files are 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff1.gz,
4.2.0-4.3.0.diff2.gz, 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff3.gz and 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff4.gz.  There
is also a tarball that contains some files that have components that can't be
included in a diff.  It is 4.3.0.tgz.  These patches should be applied to a
clean 4.2.0 source tree, working from the directory containing the xc/ direc-
tory.  The patches should be applied by running:

     gzip -d < 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff1.gz | patch -p0 -E
     gzip -d < 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff2.gz | patch -p0 -E
     gzip -d < 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff3.gz | patch -p0 -E
     gzip -d < 4.2.0-4.3.0.diff4.gz | patch -p0 -E

     rm -f xc/doc/hardcopy/Xext/mit-shm.PS.gz
     rm -f xc/doc/hardcopy/saver/saver.PS.gz
     rm -fr xc/fonts/scaled/Ethiopic
     rm -fr xc/fonts/scaled/Meltho
     rm -fr xc/programs/Xserver/hw/darwin/bundle
     rm -f xc/programs/Xserver/hw/hp/input/drivers/XHPKeymaps
     rm -f xc/programs/Xserver/hw/hp/ngle/ngledoblt.o.8.07
     rm -f xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xwin/X.ico
     rm -fr xc/programs/xcursorgen/redglass
     rm -fr xc/programs/xcursorgen/whiteglass
     touch xc/extras/Mesa/src/Trace/tr_attrib.c
     touch xc/lib/fontconfig/NEWS

     gzip -d < 4.3.0.tgz | tar vxf -

To format the XFree86 documentation use the latest version of our doctools
package available from the XFree86 CVS repository's "doctools" module, and
from our ftp site <URL:ftp://ftp.xfree86.org/pub/XFree86/misc/doc-
tools-1.3.1.tgz>.

The XFree86 source code for this and all releases/snapshots as well as devel-
opment versions can also be accessed via the XFree86 CVS repository.  Infor-
mation about accessing this can be found at the CVS page
<URL:http://www.xfree86.org/cvs/> on our web site.  It's also possible to
browse the XFree86 CVS repository at our CVSWeb server
<URL:http://cvsweb.xfree86.org/>.  The CVS tag for this version is
"xf-4_3_0".  The CVS tag for the stable branch for this release is
"xf-4_3-branch".  To check out the latest development version, don't specify
any tag.

6.  Reporting Bugs

Bugs should be reported to <XFree86@XFree86.org>.  Before reporting bugs,
please check the XFree86 server log file, which can be found at
/var/log/XFree86.0.log on most platforms.  If you can't resolve the problem
yourself, send the entire log file with your bug report but not the operating
system core dump.  Do not edit  the log file as our developers use it to
reproduce and debug your problem.

     Generated from XFree86: xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/doc/sgml/README.sgml,v 3.134 2003/02/27 01:19:32 dawes Exp $


$XFree86: xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/doc/README,v 3.129 2003/02/27 02:16:18 dawes Exp $
